



WG Working Group                                              E. Stephan
Internet-Draft                                                    Orange
Intended status: Informational                                  T. Lorne
Expires: 9 January 2025                                       Booking BV
                                                              M. Palmero
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                             8 July 2024


               legacy Modularity Usage for Eco-conception
                  draft-stephan-legacy-path-eco-design

Abstract

   This document discusses the usage of inventory-maintained information
   for assessing the adaptation of existing devices to eco-design.  This
   assessment is driven by the weight of the manufacturing in the
   sustainability cost with regard to the power consumption in
   operation.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://emile22.github.io/sustainability/draft-stephan-legacy-path-
   eco-design-latest.html.  Status information for this document may be
   found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-stephan-legacy-path-
   eco/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Green BoF individual
   mailing list (mailto:green-bof@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/green-bof/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/green-bof/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/emile22/sustainability.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 January 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Network and Devices Modularity
   3.  Simple Update
     3.1.  Simple Software Update
   4.  Complex Update
   5.  Path Toward Dynamic Assessement
   6.  Legacy Device and Energy efficiency
     6.1.  IETF EMAN WG
   7.  Use Cases
     7.1.  Device replacement in a DC
     7.2.  Embedded Carbon
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  IANA Considerations
   10. Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Many companies have integrated sustainability improvements into their
   core business strategies.  Such trend is driven by the growing
   awareness of environmental matters and regulatory requirements like
   Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD), a regulatory
   framework proposed by the European Commission to enhance corporate
   transparency and ensure that companies provide comparable information
   to assess their sustainability performance.  In a close future they
   will integrate the regulation on ecodesign framework [(EU) 2024/1781]
   published in June by the European Commission.

   Sustainability impacts numerous aspects of the life cycle management
   (LCM) of devices.  This document discusses the benefits of leveraging
   existing devices modularity to introduce eco-designed components in
   the networks while being able to assess the gains in sustainability.

   The motivations are the urgent need to reduce power consumption by
   replacing device components with more energy-efficient alternatives,
   and to decrease embedded carbon emissions while extending the life
   duration of the device chassis.  It can be viewed as a very basic use
   case of GREEN-bof [GREEN-BOF] approach and the requirement of a fast
   track specification for reporting the path of a legacy device to
   sustainability.

2.  Network and Devices Modularity

   Many Networks and networking devices (e.g., routers, switches, or
   Network Functions (NFs)) are designed with some modularity to cope
   with manufacturing and operational constraints.  However, the
   modularity level is a still implementation and deployment specific.
   It is expected that legacy devices will be progressively replaced
   with eco-design products.  Both will co-exist in networks as there is
   a balance to find between the increase of the live duration of
   existing devices and their replacement with eco-design devices
   [SUST-INS].

   The same approach applies at the same time to individual devices:
   legacy devices will include progressively more and more eco-designed
   hardware components.

   Eco-design means that the products include environmental
   considerations throughout their entire lifecycle to reduce their
   environmental impact.  In France they are based on General Reference
   Base for Eco-Design in digital services ("RGESN") at
   https://ecoresponsable.numerique.gouv.fr/publications/referentiel-
   general-ecoconception/.

   Eco-design can be summarized as the concepts and current practices
   related to the integration of environmental aspects into every stage
   of a product lifecycle.  This starts at product design and
   development [ISO/TR 14062:2002 ]

   The upgrade of legacy devices with eco-designed cards can be separate
   in 2 categories:

   *  "Simple" update : The adaptation is simple, a card is 'just'
      replaced with another one which consumes significantly less power
      by itself when running and which required fewer resources during
      its manufacturing and its deployment.

   *  "Complex" update: The replacement of the card requires the adding
      or the update of software components to enable dynamic power
      consumption.

3.  Simple Update

   Network operators have been updating their devices' components for
   decades.  Consequently, replacement with eco-designed components can
   be begun immediately as there is no dependency on management
   solutions.  The assessment of environmental and power gains can be
   done manually or with ad hoc scripts from the datasheets of the
   manufacturer or using an ad hoc process.

   It is clear that information for doing static assessment is spread
   over many mediums or OPS interfaces (datasheet, Web URL, CLI , YANG,
   MIB, IPFIX ...).  A proposal consists in documenting how to do static
   assessment for a set of devices and components based on volunteering
   [GREEN-BOF].

   In the mid-term, in a way to scale the assessment, inventory [IVY-WG]
   requires distinguishing legacy devices which include eco-designed
   components and eco-designed components inside legacy devices.  This
   must not delay the initial deployment of eco-designed components in
   legacy devices described above.

3.1.  Simple Software Update

   Software modularity increases with the generalisation of continuous
   development and deployment approaches.  Power consumption of current
   software components of network devices is rarely evaluated.  They can
   be updated immediately 'just' by replacing with another one which
   consumes significantly less power by itself.

   It might seem inappropriate to try to decrease the power consumption
   of a software component as intuitively it is only doing what is
   expected, so this can't be reduced.  However, software does not
   always use resources optimally and software updates can significantly
   improve or degrade performance and resource consumption.

   This exists for assessing power efficiency of Web application
   components with good results.  As an example, GreenIT is available as
   a browser plugin https://github.com/cnumr/GreenIT-Analysis.

4.  Complex Update

   Currently network devices are mostly always-on.  The design of their
   software components do not include dynamic power management.

   The update of legacy networks and devices to support dynamic power
   management is a complex topic because it impacts the different type
   of components:

   *  hardware components must support variation of power, of bit rate
      or only being shutdown and restarted

   *  firmware components must expose monitoring and actionable
      functions to software components

   *  software components must be updated or added to operate these new
      capabilities

   Legacy hardware components are rarely designed to be stopped and
   restarted.  The rhythm of start/stop supported by such components
   must be documented to prevent wrong usage of their real capacity.
   This must be present in the datasheet or exposed by the components
   themselves.

5.  Path Toward Dynamic Assessement

   In the short-term, as promoted by several discussions in the GREEN-
   BoF mailing list, the device level assessment requires datamodels
   augmentation [IVY-WG] to expose these capabilities and configuration
   updates first, and metrics to measure the power consumption [POWEFF]
   second.

   In parallel it should document the minimum information (readable and
   parsable) about the parts of a legacy device which migrated to
   sustainability.

   Hackathon sessions can be used to compare assessment methods based
   either on inventory metadata or metrics.

6.  Legacy Device and Energy efficiency

   Legacy network devices energy efficiency monitoring and control
   differ from end-user devices.

   As they are alway powered, network devices power consumption is taked
   in account during the dimensioning of a network.  The operational
   phase, so after deployment, represents the main portion of a network
   device's total energy consumption.  Nevertheless the manufacturing
   (including testing, ...) and the deployment (including transport...)
   is significant especially if the recycling is included.

   On the opposite, end-user portable devices power consumption is
   explictly managed as they rely on battery and their maximum power
   consumtion occur during their manufacturing.

   There are many other types of connected devices, none of these types
   of devices expose explicitly their energy efficiency.

6.1.  IETF EMAN WG

   10 years ago the EMAN WG produced the specifications (requirements in
   rfc6988, framework in rfc7326, ENTITY-MIB in rfc6933, Energy Object
   Context MIB in rfc7461, Battery Monitoring MIB in rfc7577, Monitoring
   and Control MIB for Power and Energy in rfc7460, Applicability
   Statement in rfc7603) for managing the energy produced and consumed
   by a broad types of network devices.  The holistic approach includes
   standard for devices components rule and identifier.

   10 years later, there isn't a commonly deployed framework for energy
   management of network devices components.  Despite this, there migh
   be enough information in EMAN documents to standard the
   identification of components which "migrated to sustainability" in a
   legacy device.

   Energy Object Context MIB [rfc7461], ENTITY-MIB [rfc6933] are
   reasonable starting points as they provide identification and context
   definitions which can be reused to describe these components.  UUID
   [rfc9562] is such an example as it is in use both in EMAN MIBs and in
   YANG Hardware Management [rfc8348].

   As recalled below in the use case Embedded Carbon, the energy
   allocated to the manufacturing phase (including the steps before the
   deployement) is commonly accounted in 'embedded carbon' unit while
   the power consumption in operation is ususally measured in kilowatt-
   hour.

7.  Use Cases

7.1.  Device replacement in a DC

   Legacy hardware had to be replaced after reaching end-of-life (6+
   years of constant use), replacement components for older hardware
   became scarcer.

   Two objectives of the replacement:

   1.  reduce power consumption using newer hardware

   2.  reduce footprint in datacenter using denser devices (i.e., ~120
       devices replaced by 30)

   Before the project started it was difficult to estimate the power
   consumption reduction of the project.  Only some components had idle
   consumption and max consumption power metrics, which would be used to
   compare inventory before and after.

   During and after the project, active power consumption could only be
   measured from some components (e.g., cpu power consumption estimated
   via current and voltage sensors), and from the power distribution at
   each rack (where only a subset of devices were replaced).

   One goal of the project could not be achieved: measure impact of
   increased density of devices (i.e., fan size impact moving from 1U to
   2U devices which can be attributed to cooling) due to insufficient
   granularity of power consumption metrics (at component level).

   Standardization of power consumption metrics (e.g. idle/max) for
   inventory would improve measurement for legacy hardware replacement
   projects.  Improved power delivery designs inside racks already
   improves ability to measure real-time device power consumption, this
   allows device replacement projects to accurately measure impact.
   Devices reporting granular per-component power consumption metrics
   would allow component replacement projects to accurately measure
   reduction.

7.2.  Embedded Carbon

   In the pursuit to asses the network is essential to understand the
   'embedded carbon' of ICT equipment, which represents the greenhouse
   gas emissions associated with a product's entire lifecycle.  A Life
   Cycle Assessment (LCA), conforming to international standards such as
   ISO 14040 and ISO 14044, is employed to model these impacts across
   multiple categories, from cradle to grave, please refer to
   Sustainability Insights draft [SUST-INS].

   For smartphones, approximately 80% of lifetime CO2e emissions are
   attributed to the production phase, underscoring the significance of
   manufacturing in the device's embedded carbon.  In contrast,
   networking equipment not only incurs a substantial portion of its
   embedded carbon during production and testing but also during its
   operational life, including periods of idle power.

   Vendors are increasingly focusing on reducing the energy consumption
   of networking equipment, both in operation and throughout the
   production process.  Modular design and a circular closed-loop
   approach for component return, repair, recovery, and reuse are
   instrumental in decreasing the raw materials and emissions required
   for new components, thereby reducing the embedded carbon.

   Embedded carbon is typically estimated based on energy consumption at
   each lifecycle stage, as direct measurement is often impractical.
   This estimation is crucial for organizations and consumers making
   environmentally responsible choices and for manufacturers striving to
   minimize the carbon footprint of their products.  By selecting
   materials and processes with lower associated GHG emissions and
   improving design, manufacturers can significantly reduce energy
   consumption and, consequently, embedded carbon.

   When accounting for the energy consumption of network equipment and
   components, it is important to consider not only the idle power but
   also the energy allocated to the manufacturing phase.  This
   comprehensive approach ensures that the embedded energy—and by
   extension, the embedded carbon—of each piece of equipment is
   accurately reflected in environmental impact assessments.

8.  Security Considerations

   The tracking of LCM information may reveal device usage information.

   Device inventory can be used by attackers when assessing a system for
   vulnerable components.

9.  IANA Considerations

   At this step this document has no IANA actions.

10.  Informative References

   [GREEN-BOF]
              "BOF proposal for GREEN WG Creation", 10 May 2024,
              <https://github.com/marisolpalmero/GREEN-bof>.

   [IVY-WG]   "Network Inventory YANG", 23 June 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/ivy>.

   [POWEFF]   Jan Lindblad, Snezana Mitrovic, Marisol Palmero, and
              Gonzalo Salgueiro, "Power and Energy Efficiency", 7 May
              2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-opsawg-
              poweff>.

   [SUST-INS] Per Andersson, Jan Lindblad, Snezana Mitrovic, Marisol
              Palmero, Esther Roure, Gonzalo Salgueiro, and Stephan
              Emile, "Sustainability Insights", 20 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-almprs-
              sustainability-insights/>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Emile Stephan
   Orange
   France
   Email: emile.stephan@gmail.com


   Toby Lorne
   Booking BV
   Email: toby@toby.codes


   Marisol Palmero
   Cisco Systems
   Email: mpalmero@cisco.com
